c/circlecopyrt2002 Association for Computational LinguisticsPeriods, Capitalized Words, etc.
Andrei Mikheev∗
University of Edinburgh
In this article we present an approach for tackling three important aspects of text normaliza-
tion: sentence boundary disambiguation, disambiguation of capitalized words in positions wherecapitalization is expected, and identiﬁcation of abbreviations. As opposed to the two dominanttechniques of computing statistics or writing specialized grammars, our document-centered ap-proach works by considering suggestive local contexts and repetitions of individual words withina document. This approach proved to be robust to domain shifts and new lexica and produced per-formance on the level with the highest reported results. When incorporated into a part-of-speechtagger, it helped reduce the error rate signiﬁcantly on capitalized words and sentence boundaries.We also investigated the portability to other languages and obtained encouraging results.
1. Introduction
Disambiguation of sentence boundaries and normalization of capitalized words, as
well as identiﬁcation of abbreviations, however small in comparison to other tasksof text processing, are of primary importance in the developing of practical text-processing applications. These tasks are usually performed before actual “intelligent”text processing starts, and errors made at this stage are very likely to cause more errorsat later stages and are therefore very dangerous.
Disambiguation of capitalized words in mixed-case texts has received little atten-
tion in the natural language processing and information retrieval communities, but infact it plays an important role in many tasks. In mixed-case texts capitalized wordsusually denote proper names (names of organizations, locations, people, artifacts, etc.),but there are special positions in the text where capitalization is expected. Such manda-tory positions include the ﬁrst word in a sentence, words in titles with all signiﬁcantwords capitalized or table entries, a capitalized word after a colon or open quote, andthe ﬁrst word in a list entry, among others. Capitalized words in these and some otherpositions present a case of ambiguity: they can stand for proper names, as in White
later said ..., or they can be just capitalized common words, as in White elephants are
.... The disambiguation of capitalized words in ambiguous positions leads to the
identiﬁcation of proper names (or their derivatives), and in this article we will use
these two terms and the term case normalization interchangeably.
Church (1995, p. 294) studied, among other simple text normalization techniques,
the effect of case normalization for different words and showed that “sometimes casevariants refer to the same thing ( hurricane and Hurricane ), sometimes they refer to
different things ( continental and Continental ) and sometimes they don’t refer to much
of anything (e.g., anytime and Anytime ).” Obviously these differences arise because
some capitalized words stand for proper names (such as Continental , the name of an
airline) and some do not.
∗Institute for Communicating and Collaborative Systems, Division of Informatics, 2 Buccleuch Place,
Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK. E-mail: mikheev@cogsci.ed.ac.uk290Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
Proper names are the main concern of the named-entity recognition subtask (Chin-
chor 1998) of information extraction. The main objective of this subtask is the identi-ﬁcation of proper names and also their classiﬁcation into semantic categories (person,organization, location, etc.).
1There the disambiguation of the ﬁrst word in a sentence
(and in other ambiguous positions) is one of the central problems: about 20% of namedentities occur in ambiguous positions. For instance, the word Black in the sentence-
initial position can stand for a person’s surname but can also refer to the color. Evenin multiword capitalized phrases, the ﬁrst word can belong to the rest of the phraseor can be just an external modiﬁer. In the sentence Daily, Mason and Partners lost their
court case , it is clear that Daily, Mason and Partners is the name of a company. In the
sentence Unfortunately, Mason and Partners lost their court case , the name of the company
does not include the word Unfortunately , but the word Daily is just as common a word
asUnfortunately .
Identiﬁcation of proper names is also important in machine translation, because
usually proper names are transliterated (i.e., phonetically translated) rather than prop-erly (semantically) translated. In conﬁdential texts, such as medical records, propernames must be identiﬁed and removed before making such texts available to peopleunauthorized to have access to personally identiﬁable information. And in general,most tasks that involve text analysis will beneﬁt from the robust disambiguation ofcapitalized words into proper names and common words.
Another important task of text normalization is sentence boundary disambigua-
tion (SBD) or sentence splitting. Segmenting text into sentences is an important aspectin developing many applications: syntactic parsing, information extraction, machinetranslation, question answering, text alignment, document summarization, etc. Sen-tence splitting in most cases is a simple matter: a period, an exclamation mark, or aquestion mark usually signals a sentence boundary. In certain cases, however, a perioddenotes a decimal point or is a part of an abbreviation, and thus it does not necessarilysignal a sentence boundary. Furthermore, an abbreviation itself can be the last tokenin a sentence in which case its period acts at the same time as part of this abbreviationand as the end-of-sentence indicator (fullstop). A detailed introduction to the SBDproblem can be found in Palmer and Hearst (1997).
The disambiguation of capitalized words and sentence boundaries presents a
chicken-and-egg problem. If we know that a capitalized word that follows a period isa common word, we can safely assign such period as sentence terminal. On the otherhand, if we know that a period is not sentence terminal, then we can conclude thatthe following capitalized word is a proper name.
Another frequent source of ambiguity in end-of-sentence marking is introduced by
abbreviations: if we know that the word that precedes a period is notan abbreviation,
then almost certainly this period denotes a sentence boundary. If, however, this wordis an abbreviation, then it is not that easy to make a clear decision. This problem isexacerbated by the fact that abbreviations do not form a closed set; that is, one can-not list all possible abbreviations. Moreover, abbreviations can coincide with regularwords; for example, “in” can denote an abbreviation for “inches,” “no” can denote anabbreviation for “number,” and “bus” can denote an abbreviation for “business.”
In this article we present a method that tackles sentence boundaries, capitalized
words, and abbreviations in a uniform way through a document-centered approach.As opposed to the two dominant techniques of computing statistics about the wordsthat surround potential sentence boundaries or writing specialized grammars, our ap-
1 In this article we are concerned only with the identiﬁcation of proper names.291Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
proach disambiguates capitalized words and abbreviations by considering suggestive
local contexts and repetitions of individual words within a document. It then appliesthis information to identify sentence boundaries using a small set of rules.
2. Performance Measure, Corpora for Evaluation, and Intended Markup
A standard practice for measuring the performance of a system for the class of tasks
with which we are concerned in this article is to calculate its error rate :
error
rate=incorrectly assigned
allassigned bysystem
This single measure gives enough information, provided that the system does not
leave unassigned word tokens that it is intended to handle. Obviously, we want thesystem to handle all cases as accurately as possible. Sometimes, however, it is beneﬁcialto assign only cases in which the system is conﬁdent enough, leaving the rest to behandled by other methods. In this case apart from the error rate (which correspondsto precision or accuracy as 1 −error rate) we also measure the system’s coverage or
recall
coverage =correctly
assigned
alltobeassigned
2.1 Corpora for Evaluation
There are two corpora normally used for evaluation in a number of text-processingtasks: the Brown corpus (Francis and Kucera 1982) and the Wall Street Journal (WSJ)
corpus, both part of the Penn Treebank (Marcus, Marcinkiewicz, and Santorini 1993).The Brown corpus represents general English. It contains over one million word tokensand is composed from 15 subcorpora that belong to different genres and domains,ranging from news wire texts and scientiﬁc papers to ﬁction and transcribed speech.The Brown corpus is rich in out-of-vocabulary (unknown) words, spelling errors, andungrammatical sentences with complex internal structure. Altogether there are about500 documents in the Brown corpus, with an average length of 2,300 word tokens.
The WSJ corpus represents journalistic news wire style. Its size is also over a
million word tokens, and the documents it contains are rich in abbreviations andproper names, but they are much shorter than those in the Brown corpus. Altogetherthere are about 2,500 documents in the WSJ corpus, with an average length of about500 word tokens.
Documents in the Penn Treebank are segmented into paragraphs and sentences.
Sentences are further segmented into word tokens annotated with part-of-speech (POS)information. POS information can be used to distinguish between proper names andcommon words. We considered proper nouns ( NNP), plural proper nouns ( NNPS ), and
proper adjectives
2(JJP) to signal proper names, and all other categories were consid-
ered to signal common words or punctuation. Since proper adjectives are not includedin the Penn Treebank tag set, we had to identify and retag them ourselves with thehelp of a gazetteer.
Abbreviations in the Penn Treebank are tokenized together with their trailing pe-
riods, whereas fullstops and other sentence boundary punctuation are tokenized asseparate tokens. This gives all necessary information for the evaluation in all our three
2 These are adjectives derived from proper nouns (e.g. “American”).292Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
tasks: the sentence boundary disambiguation task, the capitalized word disambigua-
tion task, and the abbreviation identiﬁcation task.
2.2 Tokenization Convention and Corpora Markup
For easier handling of potential sentence boundary punctuation, we developed a newtokenization convention for periods. In the traditional Penn Treebank schema, abbrevi-ations are tokenized together with their trailing periods, and thus stand-alone periods
unambiguously signal the end of a sentence. We decided to treat periods and all otherpotential sentence termination punctuation as “ﬁrst-class citizens” and adopted a con-vention always to tokenize a period (and other punctuation) as a separate token whenit is followed by a white space, line break, or punctuation. In the original Penn Tree-bank format, periods are unambiguous, whereas in our new convention they can takeon one of the three tags: fullstop ( .), part of abbreviation ( A) or both ( *).
To generate the new format from the Penn Treebank, we had to split ﬁnal periods
from abbreviations, mark them as separate tokens and assign them with Aor*tags
according to whether or not the abbreviation was the last token in a sentence. Weapplied a similar tokenization convention to the case in which several (usually three)periods signal ellipsis in a sentence. Again, sometimes such constructions occur withina sentence and sometimes at a sentence break. We decided to treat such constructionssimilarly to abbreviations, tokenize all periods but the last together in a single token,and tokenize the last period separately and tag it with Aor*according to whether
or not the ellipsis was the last token in a sentence. We treated periods in numbers(e.g., 14.534 ) or inside acronyms (e.g., Y.M.C.A. ) as part of tokens rather than separate
periods.
In all our experiments we treated embedded sentence boundaries in the same way
as normal sentence boundaries. An embedded sentence boundary occurs when thereis a sentence inside a sentence. This can be a quoted direct-speech subsentence inside asentence, a subsentence embedded in brackets, etc. We considered closing punctuationof such sentences equal to closing punctuation of normal sentences.
We also specially marked word tokens in positions where they were ambiguously
capitalized if such word tokens occurred in one of the following contexts:
•the ﬁrst token in a sentence
•following a separately tokenized period, question mark, exclamation
mark, semicolon, colon, opening quote, closing quote, opening bracket,or closed bracket
•occurring in a sentence with all words capitalized
All described transformations were performed automatically by applying a simple
Perl script. We found quite a few infelicities in the original tokenization and tagging,
however, which we had to correct by hand. We also converted both our corpora fromtheir original Penn Treebank format into an XML format where each word token isrepresented as an XML element ( W) with the attribute Cholding its POS information
and attribute Aset toYfor ambiguously capitalized words. An example of such a
markup is displayed in Figure 1.
3. Our Approach to Sentence Boundary DisambiguationIf we had at our disposal entirely correct information on whether or not each word
preceding a period was an abbreviation and whether or not each capitalized word293Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
...<W C=RB>soon</W><W C=’.’>.</W> <W A=Y C=NNP>Mr</W><W C=A>.</W>...
...<W C=VBN>said</W> <W C=NNP>Mr</W><W C=A>.</W>
<W A=Y C=NNP>Brown</W>...
...<W C=’,’>,</W> <W C=NNP>Tex</W><W C=’*’>.</W>
<W A=Y C=JJP>American</W>...
Figure 1
Example of the new tokenization and markup generated from the Penn Treebank format.Tokens are represented as XML elements W, where the attribute Cholds POS information.
Proper names are tagged as NNP,NNPS andJJP. Periods are tagged as .(fullstop), A(part of
abbreviation), *(a fullstop and part of abbreviation at the same time). Ambiguously
capitalized words are marked with A=Y .
that follows a period was a proper name, we could apply a very simple set of rules
to disambiguate sentence boundaries:
•If a period follows a nonabbreviation, it is sentence terminal ( .).
•If a period follows an abbreviation and is the last token in a text passage
(paragraph, document, etc.), it is sentence terminal and part of theabbreviation ( *).
•If a period follows an abbreviation and is not followed by a capitalized
word, it is part of the abbreviation and is not sentence terminal ( A).
•If a period follows an abbreviation and is followed by a capitalized word
that is not a proper name, it is sentence terminal and part of theabbreviation ( *).
It is a trivial matter to extend these rules to allow for brackets and quotation marks
between the period and the following word. To handle other sentence terminationpunctuation such as question and exclamation marks and semicolons, this rule setalso needs to include corresponding rules. The entire rule set for sentence boundarydisambiguation that was used in our experiments is listed in Appendix A.
3.1 Ideal Case: Upper Bound for Our SBD Approach
The estimates from the Brown corpus and the WSJ corpus (section 3) show that theapplication of the SBD rule set described above together with the information onabbreviations and proper names marked up in the corpora produces very accurateresults (error rate less than 0.0001%), but it leaves unassigned the outcome of the casein which an abbreviation is followed by a proper name. This is a truly ambiguous case,and to deal with this situation in general, one should encode detailed informationabout the words participating in such contexts. For instance, honoriﬁc abbreviationssuch as Mr. orDr.when followed by a proper name almost certainly do not end a
sentence, whereas the abbreviations of U.S. states such as Mo.,Cal., and Ore., when
followed directly by a proper name, most likely end a sentence. Obviously encodingthis kind of information into the system requires detailed analysis of the domain lexica,is not robust to unseen abbreviations, and is labor intensive.
To make our method robust to unseen words, we opted for a crude but simple
solution. If such ambiguous cases are always resolved as “not sentence boundary” ( A),
this produces, by our measure, an error rate of less than 3%. Estimates from the Brown294Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
Table 1
Estimates of the upper and lower bound error rates on the SBD task for our method. Threeestimated categories are sentence boundaries, ambiguously capitalized words, andabbreviations.
Brown Corpus WSJ Corpus
SBD Amb. Cap. Abbreviations SBD Amb. Cap. Abbreviations
Number of 59,539 58,957 4,657 53,043 54,537 16,317resolved instances
A Upper Bound: 0.01% 0.0% 0.0% 0.13% 0.0% 0.0%
All correct propernamesAll correct abbrs.
B Lower Bound: 2.00% 7.4% 10.8% 4.10% 15.0% 9.6%
Lookup propernamesGuessed abbrs.
C Lookup proper 1.20% 7.4% 0.0% 2.34% 15.0% 0.0%
namesAll correct abbrs.
D All correct proper 0.45% 0.0% 10.8% 1.96% 0.0% 9.6%
namesGuessed abbrs.
corpus and the WSJ corpus showed that such ambiguous cases constitute only 5–7%
of all potential sentence boundaries. This translates into a relatively small impact ofthe crude strategy on the overall error rate on sentence boundaries. This impact wasmeasured at 0.01% on the Brown corpus and at 0.13% on the WSJ corpus, as presentedin row A of Table 1. Although this overly simplistic strategy extracts a small penaltyfrom the performance, we decided to use it because it is very general and independentof domain-speciﬁc knowledge.
The SBD handling strategy described above is simple, robust, and well perform-
ing, but it relies on the assumption that we have entirely correct information aboutabbreviations and proper names, as can be seen in row A of the table. The main dif-ﬁculty is that when dealing with real-world texts, we have to identify abbreviationsand proper names ourselves. Thus estimates based on the application of our methodwhen using 100% correctly disambiguated capitalized words and abbreviations can beconsidered as the upper bound for the SBD approach, that is, the top performance wecan achieve.
3.2 Worst Case: Lower Bound for Our SBD Approach
We can also estimate the lower bound for this approach applying very simple strategiesto the identiﬁcation of proper names and abbreviations.
The simplest strategy for deciding whether or not a capitalized word in an ambigu-
ous position is a proper name is to apply a lexical-lookup strategy (possibly enhancedwith a morphological word guesser, e.g., Mikheev [1997]). Using this strategy, wordsnot listed as known common words for a language are usually marked as propernames. The application of this strategy produced a 7.4% error rate on the Browncorpus and a 15% error rate on the WSJ corpus. The difference in error rates can beexplained by the observation that the WSJ corpus contains a higher percentage of orga-nization names and person names, which often coincide with common English words,295Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
and it contains more words in titles with all important words capitalized, which we
also consider as ambiguously capitalized.
The simplest strategy for deciding whether a word that is followed by a period
is an abbreviation or a regular word is to apply well-known heuristics based on theobservation that single-word abbreviations are short and normally do not includevowels ( Mr.,Dr.,kg.). Thus a word without vowels can be guessed to be an abbreviation
unless it is written in all capital letters and can stand for an acronym or a proper name(e.g., BBC ). A span of single letters separated by periods forms an abbreviation too
(e.g., Y.M.C.A. ). A single letter followed by a period is also a very likely abbreviation.
There is also an additional heuristic that classiﬁes as abbreviations short words (withlength less than ﬁve characters) that are followed by a period and then by a comma, alower-cased word, or a number. All other words are considered to be nonabbreviations.
These heuristics are reasonably accurate. On the WSJ corpus they misrecognized
as abbreviations only 0.2% of tokens. On the Brown corpus the misrecognition rate wassigniﬁcantly higher: 1.6%. The major source for these errors were single letters thatstand for mathematical symbols in the scientiﬁc subcorpora of the Brown Corpus (e.g.,point T ortriangle F ). The major shortcoming of these abbreviation-guessing heuristics,
however, comes from the fact that they failed to identify about 9.5% of abbreviations.This brings the overall error rate of the abbreviation-guessing heuristics to about 10%.
Combining the information produced by the lexical-lookup approach to proper
name identiﬁcation with the abbreviation-guessing heuristics feeding the SBD rule setgave us a 2.0% error rate on the Brown corpus and 4.1% on the WSJ corpus on theSBD task. This can be interpreted as the lower bound to our SBD approach. Here wesee how errors in the identiﬁcation of proper names and abbreviations propagatedthemselves into errors on sentence boundaries. Row B of Table 1 displays a summaryfor the lower-bound results.
3.3 Major Findings
We also measured the importance of each of the two knowledge sources (abbreviationsand proper names) separately. First, we applied the SBD rule set when all abbreviationswere correctly identiﬁed (using the information presented in the corpus) but applyingthe lexical lookup strategy to proper-name identiﬁcation (row C of Table 1). Then, weapplied the SBD rule set when all proper names were correctly identiﬁed (using theinformation presented in the corpus) but applying the guessing heuristics to handleabbreviations (row D of the table). In general, when a knowledge source returned100% accurate information this signiﬁcantly improved performance on the SBD taskmeasured against the lower-bound error rate. We also see that proper names have ahigher impact on the SBD task than abbreviations.
Since the upper bound of our SBD approach is high and the lower bound is far
from being acceptable, our main strategy for sentence boundary disambiguation will be to
invest in the disambiguation of capitalized words and abbreviations that then feed our SBDrule set .
4. Document-Centered Approach to Proper Name and Abbreviation Handling
As we discussed above, virtually any common word can potentially act as a proper
name or part of a multiword proper name. The same applies to abbreviations: there isno ﬁxed list of abbreviations, and almost any short word can be used as an abbrevia-tion. Fortunately, there is a mitigating factor too: important words are typically usedin a document more than once and in different contexts. Some of these contexts create296Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
ambiguity, but some do not. Furthermore, ambiguous words and phrases are usually
unambiguously introduced at least once in the text unless they are part of commonknowledge presupposed to be possessed by the readers.
This observation can be applied to a broader class of tasks. For example, people
are often referred to by their surnames (e.g., Black ) but are usually introduced at least
once in the text either with their ﬁrst name ( John Black ) or with their title/profession
afﬁliation ( Mr. Black ,President Bush ), and it is only when their names are common
knowledge that they do not need an introduction (e.g., Castro ,Gorbachev ). Thus our
suggestion is to look at the unambiguous usages of the words in question in the entire document .
In the case of proper name identiﬁcation, we are not concerned with the semantic
class of a name (e.g., whether it is a person’s name or a location), but rather we simplywant to distinguish whether a capitalized word in a particular occurrence acts as aproper name (or part of a multiword proper name). If we restrict our scope to a singlesentence, we might ﬁnd that there is just not enough information to make a reliabledecision. For instance, Riders in the sentence Riders rode all over the green is equally likely
to be a proper noun, a plural proper noun, or a plural common noun. But if in thesame text we ﬁnd John Riders , this sharply increases the likelihood that the proper noun
interpretation is the correct one, and conversely if we ﬁnd many riders , this suggests
the plural-noun interpretation.
The above reasoning can be summarized as follows: if we detect that a word is
used capitalized in an unambiguous context, this increases the chances that this wordacts as a proper name in ambiguous positions in the same document. And converselyif a word is seen only lower-cased, this increases the chances that it should be treatedas a common word even when used capitalized in ambiguous positions in the samedocument. (This, of course, is only a general principle and will be further elaboratedelsewhere in the article.)
The same logic applies to abbreviations. Although a short word followed by a
period is a potential abbreviation, the same word occurring in the same documentin a different context can be unambiguously classiﬁed as a regular word if it is usedwithout a trailing period, or it can be unambiguously classiﬁed as an abbreviation ifit is used with a trailing period and is followed by a lower-cased word or a comma.This information gives us a better chance of assigning these potential abbreviationscorrectly in nonobvious contexts.
We call such style of processing a document-centered approach (DCA), since in-
formation for the disambiguation of an individual word token is derived from theentire document rather than from its immediate local context. Essentially the systemcollects suggestive instances of usage for target words from each document underprocessing and applies this information on the ﬂy to the processing of the document,in a manner similar to instance-based learning. This differentiates DCA from the tradi-tional corpus-based approach, in which learning is applied prior to processing, whichis usually performed with supervision over multiple documents of the training corpus.
5. Building Support Resources
Our method requires only four word lists. Each list is a collection of words that belong
to a single type, but at the same time, a word can belong to multiple lists. Since wehave four lists, we have four types:
•common word (as opposed to proper name)
•common word that is a frequent sentence starter297Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
•frequent proper name
•abbreviation (as opposed to regular word)
These four lists can be acquired completely automatically from raw (unlabeled) texts.
For the development of these lists we used a collection of texts of about 300,000 wordsderived from the New York Times (NYT) corpus that was supplied as training data for
the 7th Message Understanding Conference (MUC-7) (Chinchor 1998). We used thesetexts because the approach described in this article was initially designed to be partof a named-entity recognition system (Mikheev, Grover, and Moens 1998) developedfor MUC-7. Although the corpus size of 300,000 words can be seen as large, the factthat this corpus does not have to be annotated in any way and that a corpus of similarsize can be easily collected from on-line sources (including the Internet) makes thisresource cheap to obtain.
The ﬁrst list on which our method relies is a list of common words . This list
includes common words for a given language, but no supplementary information suchas POS or morphological information is required to be present in this list. A varietyof such lists for many languages are already available (e.g., Burnage 1990). Words insuch lists are usually supplemented with morphological and POS information (whichis not required by our method). We do not have to rely on pre-existing resources,however. A list of common words can be easily obtained automatically from a raw(unannotated in any way) text collection by simply collecting and counting lower-cased words in it. We generated such list from the NYT collection. To account forpotential spelling and capitalization errors, we included in the list of common wordsonly words that occurred lower-cased at least three times in the NYT texts. The listof common words that we developed from the NYT collection contained about 15,000English words.
The second list on which our method relies is a frequent-starters list , a list of
common words most frequently used in sentence-starting positions. This list can alsobe obtained completely automatically from an unannotated corpus by applying thelexical-lookup strategy. As discussed in Section 3.2, this strategy performs with a7–15% error rate. We applied the list of common words over the NYT text collec-tion to tag capitalized words in sentence-starting positions as common words and asproper names: if a capitalized word was found in the list of common words, it wastagged as a common word: otherwise it was tagged as a proper name. Of course, suchtagging was far from perfect, but it was good enough for our purposes. We included inthe frequent-starters list only the 200 most frequent sentence-starting common words.This was more than a safe threshold to ensure that no wrongly tagged words wereadded to this list. As one might predict, the most frequent sentence-starting commonword was The. This list also included some adverbs, such as However ,Suddenly , and
Once ; some prepositions, such as In,To, and By; and even a few verbs: Let,Have ,Do, etc.
The third list on which our method relies is a list of single-word proper names that
coincide with common words. For instance, the word Japan is much more likely to be
used as a proper name (name of a country) rather than a verb, and therefore it needs tobe included in this list. We included in the proper name list 200 words that were mostfrequently seen in the NYT text collection as single capitalized words in unambiguouspositions and that at the same time were present in the list of common words. Forinstance, the word Thecan frequently be seen capitalized in unambiguous positions,
but it is always followed by another capitalized word, so we do not count it as acandidate. On the other hand the word China is often seen capitalized in unambiguous
positions where it is not preceded or followed by other capitalized words. Since china298Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
Table 2
Error rates for different combinations of the abbreviation identiﬁcation methods, includingcombinations of guessing heuristics (GH), lexical lookup (LL), and the document-centeredapproach (DCA).
Abbreviation Identiﬁcation Method WSJ Brown
A GH 9.6% 10.8%B LL 12.6% 11.9%CG H +LL 1.2% 2.1%
DG H +DCA 6.6% 8.9%
EG H +DCA+LL 0.8% 1.2%
is also listed among common words and is much less frequently used in this way, we
include it in the proper name list.
The fourth list on which our method relies is a list of known abbreviations .
Again, we induced this list completely automatically from an unannotated corpus.We applied the abbreviation-guessing heuristics described in Section 6 to our NYTtext collection and then extracted the 270 most frequent abbreviations: all abbrevi-ations that appeared ﬁve times or more. This list included honoriﬁc abbreviations(Mr,Dr), corporate designators ( Ltd,Co), month name abbreviations ( Jan,Feb), ab-
breviations of names of U.S. states ( Ala,Cal), measure unit abbreviations ( ft,kg), etc.
Although we described these abbreviations in groups, this information was not en-coded in the list; the only information this list provides is that a word is a knownabbreviation.
Among these four lists the ﬁrst three reﬂect general language regularities and
usually do not require modiﬁcation for handling texts from a new domain. The ab-breviation list, however, is much more domain dependent and for better performanceneeds to be reinduced for a new domain. Since the compilation of all four lists does notrequire data preannotated in any way, it is very easy to specialize the above-describedlists to a particular domain: we can simply rebuild the lists using a domain-speciﬁccorpus. This process is completely automatic and does not require any human laborapart from collecting a raw domain-speciﬁc corpus. Since all cutoff thresholds thatwe applied here were chosen by intuition, however, different domains might requiresome new settings.
6. Recognizing Abbreviations
The answer to the question of whether or not a particular word token is an abbreviation
or a regular word largely solves the sentence boundary problem. In the Brown corpus92% of potential sentence boundaries come after regular words. The WSJ corpus isricher with abbreviations, and only 83% of sentences in that corpus end with a regularword followed by a period. In Section 3 we described the heuristics for abbreviationguessing and pointed out that although these heuristics are reasonably accurate, theyfail to identify about 9.5% of abbreviations. Since unidentiﬁed abbreviations are thentreated as regular words, the overall error rate of the guessing heuristics was measuredat about 10% (row A of Table 2). Thus, to improve this error rate, we need ﬁrst of allto improve the coverage of the abbreviation-handling strategy.
A standard way to do this is to use the guessing heuristics in conjunction with a
list of known abbreviations. We decided to use the list of 270 abbreviations describedin Section 5. First we applied only the lexical-lookup strategy to our two corpora (i.e.,299Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
only when a token was found in the list of 270 known abbreviations was it marked
as an abbreviation). This gave us an unexpectedly high error rate of about 12%, asdisplayed in row B of Table 2. When we investigated the reason for the high errorrate, we found that the majority of single letters and spans of single letters sepa-rated by periods (e.g. Y.M.C.A.) found in the Brown corpus and the WSJ corpus werenot present in our abbreviation list and therefore were not recognized as abbrevia-tions.
Such cases, however, are handled well by the abbreviation-guessing heuristics.
When we applied the abbreviation list together with the abbreviation-guessing heuris-tics (row C of Table 2), this gave us a very strong performance on the WSJ corpus:an error rate of 1.2%. On the Brown corpus, the error rate was higher: 2.1%. This canbe explained by the fact that we collected our abbreviation list from a corpus of newsarticles that is not too dissimilar to the texts in the WSJ corpus and thus, this list con-tained many abbreviations found in that corpus. The Brown corpus, in contrast, rangesacross several different domains and sublanguages, which makes it more difﬁcult tocompile a list from a single corpus to cover it.
6.1 Unigram DCA
The abbreviation-guessing heuristics supplemented with a list of abbreviations areaccurate, but they still can miss some abbreviations. For instance, if an abbreviationlike secorOkla. is followed by a capitalized word and is not listed in the list of
abbreviations, the guessing heuristics will not uncover them. We also would like toboost the abbreviation handling with a domain-independent method that enables thesystem to function even when the abbreviation list is not much of a help. Thus, inaddition to the list of known abbreviations and the guessing heuristics, we decided toapply the DCA as described below.
Each word of length four characters or less that is followed by a period is treated as
a potential abbreviation. First, the system collects unigrams of potential abbreviationsin unambiguous contexts from the document under processing. If a potential abbre-viation is used elsewhere in the document without a trailing period, we can concludethat it in fact is not an abbreviation but rather a regular word (nonabbreviation). Todecide whether a potential abbreviation is really an abbreviation, we look for contextsin which it is followed by a period and then by a lower-cased word, a number, or acomma.
For instance, the word Kong followed by a period and then by a capitalized word
cannot be safely classiﬁed as a regular word (nonabbreviation), and therefore it is apotential abbreviation. But if in the same document we detect a context lived in Hong
Kong in 1993 , this indicates that Kong in this document is normally written without
a trailing period and hence is not an abbreviation. Having established that, we canapply this information to nonevident contexts and classify Kong as a regular word
throughout the document. However, if we detect a context such as Kong., said, this
indicates that in this document, Kong is normally written with a trailing period and
hence is an abbreviation. This gives us grounds for classifying Kong as an abbreviation
in all its occurrences within the same document.
6.2 Bigram DCA
The DCA relies on the assumption that there is a consistency in writing within thesame document. Different authors can write MrorDrwith or without a trailing period,
but we assume that the same author (the author of a particular document) writesit in the same way consistently. A situation can arise, however, in which the samepotential abbreviation is used as a regular word and as an abbreviation within the same300Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
document. This is usually the case when an abbreviation coincides with a regular word,
for example Sun. (meaning Sunday) and Sun (the name of a newspaper). To tackle
this problem, the system can collect from a document not only unigrams of potentialabbreviations in unambiguous contexts but also their bigrams with the precedingword. Of course, as in the case with unigrams, the bigrams are collected on the ﬂyand completely automatically.
For instance, if the system ﬁnds a context vitamin C is , it stores the bigram vita-
min C and the unigram Cwith the information that Cis a regular word. If in the
same document the system also detects a context John C. later said , it stores the bi-
gram John C and the unigram Cwith the information that Cis an abbreviation. Here
we have conﬂicting information for the word C: it was detected to act as a regu-
lar word and as an abbreviation within the same document, so there is not enoughinformation to resolve ambiguous cases purely using the unigram. Some cases, how-ever, can still be resolved on the basis of the bigrams. The system will assign Cas a
regular word (nonabbreviation) in an ambiguous context such as vitamin C. Research
because of the stored vitamin C bigram. Obviously from such a short context, it is
difﬁcult even for a human to make a conﬁdent decision, but the evidence gatheredfrom the entire document can inﬂuence this decision with a high degree of conﬁ-dence.
6.3 Resulting Approach
When neither unigrams nor bigrams can help to resolve an ambiguous context for apotential abbreviation, the system decides in favor of the more frequent category forthat abbreviation. If the word Inwas detected to act as a regular word (preposition) ﬁve
times in the current document and two times as abbreviation (for the state Indiana ), in
a context in which neither of the bigrams collected from the document can be applied,Inis assigned as a regular word (nonabbreviation). The last-resort strategy is to assign
all nonresolved cases as nonabbreviations.
Row D of Table 2 shows the results when we applied the abbreviation-guessing
heuristics together with the DCA. On the WSJ corpus, the DCA reduced the error rateof the guessing heuristics alone (row A) by about 30%; on the Brown corpus its impactwas somewhat smaller, about 18%. This can be explained by the fact that abbreviationsin the WSJ corpus have a much higher repetition rate, which is very important forthe DCA.
We also applied the DCA together with the lexical lookup and the guessing heuris-
tics. This reduced the error rate on abbreviation identiﬁcation by about 30% in com-parison with the list and guessing heuristics conﬁguration, as can be seen in row E ofTable 2.
7. Disambiguating Capitalized Words
The second key task of our approach is the disambiguation of capitalized words that
follow a potential sentence boundary punctuation sign. Apart from being an importantcomponent in the task of text normalization, information about whether or not acapitalized word that follows a period is a common word is crucial for the SBD task,as we showed in Section 3. We tackle capitalized words in a similar fashion as wetackled the abbreviations: through a document-centered approach that analyzes onthe ﬂy the distribution of ambiguously capitalized words in the entire document. Thisis implemented as a cascade of simple strategies, which were brieﬂy described inMikheev (1999).301Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
7.1 The Sequence Strategy
The ﬁrst DCA strategy for the disambiguation of ambiguous capitalized words is toexplore sequences of words extracted from contexts in which the same words are usedunambiguously with respect to their capitalization. We call this the sequence strategy .
The rationale behind this strategy is that if there is a phrase of two or more capitalizedwords starting from an unambiguous position (e.g., following a lower-cased word),the system can be reasonably conﬁdent that even when the same phrase starts from anunreliable position (e.g., after a period), all its words still have to be grouped togetherand hence are proper nouns. Moreover, this applies not just to the exact replication ofthe capitalized phrase, but to any partial ordering of its words of size two charactersor more preserving their sequence.
For instance, if a phrase Rocket Systems Development Co. is found in a document
starting from an unambiguous position (e.g., after a lower-cased word, a number, or acomma), the system collects it and also generates its partial-order subphrases: Rocket
Systems ,Rocket Systems Co. ,Rocket Co. ,Systems Development , etc. If then in the same
document Rocket Systems is found in an ambiguous position (e.g., after a period), the
system will assign the word Rocket as a proper noun because it is part of a multiword
proper name that was seen in the unambiguous context.
A span of capitalized words can also internally include alpha-numerals, abbrevia-
tions with internal periods, symbols, and lower-cased words of length three charactersor shorter. This enables the system to capture phrases like A&M and The Phantom of
the Opera . Partial orders from such phrases are generated in a similar way, but with
the restriction that every generated subphrase should start and end with a capitalizedword.
The sequence strategy can also be applied to disambiguate common words. Since
in the case of common words the system cannot determine boundaries of a phrase,only bigrams of the lower-cased words with their following words are collected fromthe document. For instance, from a context continental suppliers of Mercury , the sys-
tem collects three bigrams: continental suppliers ,suppliers of , and of Mercury . When the
system encounters the phrase Continental suppliers after a period, it can now use the
information that in the previously stored bigram continental suppliers , the word token
continental was written lower-cased and therefore was unambiguously used as a com-
mon word. On this basis the system can assign the ambiguous capitalized word tokenContinental as a common word.
Row A of Table 3 displays the results obtained in the application of the sequence
strategy to the Brown corpus and the WSJ corpus. The sequence strategy is extremelyuseful when we are dealing with names of organizations, since many of them aremultiword phrases composed of common words. For instance, the words Rocket and
Insurance can be used both as proper names and common words within the same
document. The sequence strategy maintains contexts of the usages of such wordswithin the same document, and thus it can disambiguate such usages in the ambiguouspositions matching surrounding words. And indeed, the error rate of this strategywhen applied to proper names was below 1%, with coverage of about 9–12%.
For tagging common words the sequence strategy was also very accurate (error
rate less than 0.3%), covering 17% of ambiguous capitalized common words on theWSJ corpus and 25% on the Brown corpus. The higher coverage on the Brown corpuscan be explained by the fact that the documents in that corpus are in general longerthan those in the WSJ corpus, which enables more word bigrams to be collected froma document.
Dual application of the sequence strategy contributes to its robustness against po-
tential capitalization errors in the document. The negative evidence (not proper name)302Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
Table 3
First part: Error rates of different individual strategies for capitalized-word disambiguation.Second part: Error rates of the overall cascading application of the individual strategies.
Strategy Word Class Error Rate Coverage
WSJ Brown WSJ Brown
A Sequence strategy Proper Names 0.12% 0.97% 12.6% 8.82%
Sequence strategy Common Words 0.28% 0.21% 17.68% 26.5%
B Frequent-list lookup strategy Proper Names 0.49% 0.16% 2.62% 6.54%
Frequent-list lookup strategy Common Words 0.21% 0.14% 64.62% 61.20%
C Single-word assignment strategy Proper Names 3.18% 1.96% 18.77% 34.13%
Single-word assignment strategy Common Words 6.51% 2.87% 3.07% 4.78%
D Cascading DCA Proper/Common 1.10% 0.76% 84.12% 91.76%E Cascading DCA Proper/Common 4.88% 2.83% 100.0% 100.0%
and lexical lookup
is used together with the positive evidence (proper name) and blocks assignment when
conﬂicts are found. For instance, if the system detects a capitalized phrase The President
in an unambiguous position, then the sequence strategy will treat the word theas part
of the proper name The President even when this phrase follows a period. If in the
same document, however, the system detects alternative evidence (e.g., the President ,
where theis not part of the proper name), it then will block as unsafe the assignment
ofTheas a proper name in ambiguous usages of The President .
7.2 Frequent-List Lookup Strategy
The frequent-list lookup strategy applies lookup of ambiguously capitalized wordsin two word lists. The ﬁrst list contains common words that are frequently foundin sentence-starting positions, and the other list contains the most frequent propernames. Both these lists can be compiled completely automatically, as explained insection 5. Thus, if an ambiguous capitalized word is found in the list of frequentsentence-starting common words, it is assigned as a common word, and if it is foundin the list of frequent proper names, it is assigned as a proper name. For instance,the word token Thewhen used after a period will be recognized as a common word,
because Theis a frequent sentence-starting common word. The Word token Japan in a
similar context will be recognized as a proper name, because Japan is a member of the
frequent-proper-name list.
Note, however, that this strategy is applied after the sequence strategy and thus, a
word listed in one of the lists will not necessarily be marked according to its list class.The list lookup assignment is applied only to the ambiguously capitalized words thathave not been handled by the sequence strategy.
Row B of Table 3 displays the results of the application of the frequent-list lookup
strategy to the Brown corpus and the WSJ corpus. The frequent-list lookup strategyproduced an error rate of less than 0.5%. A few wrong assignments came from phraseslike Mr. A and Mrs. Someone and words in titles like I’ve Got a Dog , where A,Someone ,
and Iwere recognized as common words although they were tagged as proper nouns
in the text. The frequent-list lookup strategy is not very effective for proper names,where it covered under 7% of candidates in the Brown corpus and under 3% in theWSJ corpus, but it is extremely effective for common words: it covered over 60% ofambiguous capitalized common words.303Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
7.3 Single-Word Assignment
The sequence strategy is accurate, but it covers only 9–12% of proper names in ambigu-ous positions. The frequent-list lookup strategy is mostly effective for common words.To boost the coverage on the proper name category, we introduced another DCAstrategy. We call this strategy single-word assignment , and it can be summarized as
follows: if a word in the current document is seen capitalized in an unambiguous po-sition and at the same time it is not used lower-cased anywhere in the document, thisword in this particular document is very likely to stand for a proper name even whenused capitalized in ambiguous positions. And conversely, if a word in the currentdocument is used only lower-cased (except in ambiguous positions), it is extremelyunlikely that this word will act as a proper name in an ambiguous position and thus,such a word can be marked as a common word.
Note that by the time single-word assignment is implemented, the sequence strat-
egy and the frequent-list lookup strategy have been already applied and all high-frequency sentence-initial words have been assigned. This ordering is important, be-cause even if a high-frequency common word is observed in a document only as aproper name (usually as part of a multiword proper name), it is still not safe to markit as a proper name in ambiguous positions.
Row C of Table 3 displays the results of the application of the single-word assign-
ment strategy to the Brown corpus and the WSJ corpus. The single-word assignmentstrategy is useful for proper-name identiﬁcation: although it is not as accurate as thesequence strategy, it still produces a reasonable error rate at the same time boosting thecoverage considerably (19–34%). On common words this method is not as effective,with an error rate as high as 6.61% on the WSJ corpus and a coverage below 5%.
The single-word-assignment strategy handles well the so-called unknown-word
problem, which arises when domain-speciﬁc lexica are missing from a general vocab-ulary. Since our system is not equipped with a general vocabulary but rather builds adocument-speciﬁc vocabulary on the ﬂy,” important domain-speciﬁc words are iden-tiﬁed and treated similarly to all other words.
A generally difﬁcult case for the single-word assignment strategy arises when a
word is used both as a proper name and as a common word in the same document, es-pecially when one of these usages occurs only in an ambiguous position. For instance,in a document about steel, the only occurrence of Steel Company happened to start
a sentence. This produced an erroneous assignment of the word Steel as a common
word. Another example: in a document about the Acting Judge , the word acting in a
sentence Acting on behalf ...was wrongly classiﬁed as a proper name. These difﬁculties,
however, often are compensated for by the sequence strategy, which is applied priorto the single-word assignment strategy and tackles such cases using n-grams of words.
7.4 Quotes, Brackets, and “After Abbr.” Heuristic
Capitalized words in quotes and brackets do not directly contribute to our primarytask of sentence boundary disambiguation, but they still present a case of ambiguityfor the task of capitalized-word disambiguation. To tackle them we applied two simpleheuristics:
•If a single capitalized word is used in quotes or brackets it is a proper
noun (e.g., John (Cool) Lee ).
•If there is a lowercased word, a number, or a comma that is followed by
an opening bracket and then by a capitalized word, this capitalized wordis a proper noun (e.g., ...happened (Moscow News reported yesterday) but ...).304Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
These heuristics are reasonably accurate: they achieved under 2% error rate on our
two test corpora, but they covered only about 6–7% of proper names.
When we studied the distribution of capitalized words after capitalized abbrevi-
ations, we uncovered an interesting empirical fact. A capitalized word that followsa capitalized abbreviation is almost certainly a proper name unless it is listed in thelist of frequent sentence-starting common words (i.e., it is not The,However , etc.). The
error rate of this heuristic is about 0.8% and, not surprisingly, in 99.5% of cases theabbreviation and the following proper name belonged to the same sentence. Naturally,the coverage of this “after abbr.” heuristic depends on the proportion of capitalizedabbreviations in the text. In our two corpora this heuristic disambiguated about 20%of ambiguous capitalized proper names.
7.5 Tagging Proper Names: The Overall Performance
In general, the cascading application of the above-described strategies achieved anerror rate of about 1%, but it left unclassiﬁed about 9% of ambiguous capitalizedwords in the Brown corpus and 15% of such words in the WSJ corpus. Row D ofTable 3 displays the results of the application of the cascading application of thecapitalized-word disambiguation strategies to the Brown corpus and the WSJ corpus.
For the proper-name category, the most productive strategy was single-word as-
signment, followed by the “after abbr.” strategy, and then the sequence strategy. Forcommon words, the most productive was the frequent-list lookup strategy, followedby the sequence strategy.
Since our system left unassigned 10–15% of ambiguous capitalized words, we have
to decide what to do with them. To keep our system simple and domain independent,we opted for the lexical-lookup strategy that we evaluated in Section 3. This strategy,of course, is not very accurate, but it is applied only to the unassigned words. Row Eof Table 3 displays the results of applying the lexical-lookup strategy after the DCAmethods. We see that the error rate went up in comparison to the DCA-only methodby more than three times (2.9% on the Brown corpus and 4.9% on the WSJ corpus),but no unassigned ambiguous capitalized words are left in the text.
8. Putting It All Together: Assigning Sentence Boundaries
After abbreviations have been identiﬁed and capitalized words have been classiﬁed
into proper names and common words, the system can carry out the assignmentsof sentence boundaries using the SBD rule set described in Section 3 and listed inAppendix A. This rule set makes use of the observation that if we have at our dis-posal unambiguous (but not necessarily correct) information as to whether a particularword that precedes a period is an abbreviation and whether the word that followsthis period is a proper name, then in mixed-case texts we can easily assign a pe-riod (and other potential sentence termination punctuation) as a sentence break ornot.
The only ambiguous outcome is generated by the conﬁguration in which an ab-
breviation is followed by a proper name. We decided to handle this case by applyinga crude and simple strategy of always resolving it as “not sentence boundary.” On onehand, this makes our method simple and robust, but on the other hand, it imposessome penalty on its performance.
Row A of Table 4 summarizes the upper bound for our SBD approach: when we
have entirely correct information on the abbreviations and proper names, as explainedin Section 3.1. There the erroneous assignments come only from the crude treatmentof abbreviations that are followed by proper names.305Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
Table 4
Error rates measured on the SBD, capitalized-word disambiguation, and abbreviationidentiﬁcation tasks achieved by different methods described in this article.
Method Brown Corpus WSJ Corpus
SBD Capitalized Abbreviations SBD Capitalized Abbreviations
words words
A Upper bound 0.01% 0.0% 0.0% 0.13% 0.0% 0.0%B Lower bound 2.00% 7.40% 10.8% 4.10% 15.0% 9.6%C Best quoted 0.20% 3.15% — 0.50% 4.72% —DDCA 0.28% 2.83% 0.8% 0.45% 4.88% 1.2%
E DCA (no abbreviations 0.65% 2.89% 8.9% 1.41% 4.92% 6.6%
lexicon)
F POS tagger 0.25% 3.15% 1.2% 0.39% 4.72% 2.1%G POS tagger + DCA 0.20% 1.87% 0.8% 0.31% 3.22% 1.2%
Row B of Table 4 summarizes the lower-bound results. The lower bound for our
approach was estimated by applying the lexical-lookup strategy for capitalized-worddisambiguation together with the abbreviation-guessing heuristics to feed the SBDrule set, as described in Section 3.2. Here we see a signiﬁcant impact of the infelicitiesin the disambiguation of capitalized words and abbreviations on the performance ofthe SBD rule set.
Row C of Table 4 summarizes the highest results known to us (for all three tasks)
produced by automatic systems on the Brown corpus and the WSJ corpus. State-of-the-art machine learning and rule-based SBD systems achieve an error rate of 0.8–1.5%measured on the Brown corpus and the WSJ corpus. The best performance on theWSJ corpus was achieved by a combination of the SATZ system (Palmer and Hearst1997) with the Alembic system (Aberdeen et al. 1995): a 0.5% error rate. The bestperformance on the Brown corpus, a 0.2% error rate, was reported by Riley (1989), whotrained a decision tree classiﬁer on a 25-million-word corpus. In the disambiguation ofcapitalized words, the most widespread method is POS tagging, which achieves abouta 3% error rate on the Brown corpus and a 5% error rate on the WSJ corpus, as reportedin Mikheev (2000). We are not aware of any studies devoted to the identiﬁcation ofabbreviations with comprehensive evaluation on either the Brown corpus or the WSJcorpus.
In row D of Table 4, we summarized our main results: the results obtained by the
application of our SBD rule set, which uses the information provided by the DCA tocapitalized word disambiguation applied together with lexical lookup (as describedin Section 7.5), and the abbreviation-handling strategy, which included the guessingheuristics, the DCA, and the list of 270 abbreviations (as described in Section 6). Ascan be seen in the table, the performance of this system is almost indistinguishablefrom the best previously quoted results. On proper-name disambiguation, it achieveda 2.83% error rate on the Brown corpus and a 4.88% error rate on the WSJ corpus.On the SBD task, it achieved a 0.28% error rate on the Brown corpus and a 0.45%error rate on the WSJ corpus. If we compare these results with the upper boundfor our SBD approach, we can see that the infelicities in proper-name and abbrevia-tion identiﬁcation introduced an increase of about 0.3% in the error rate on the SBDtask.
To test the adaptability of our approach to a completely new domain, we applied
our system in a conﬁguration in which it was notequipped with the list of 270 abbre-306Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
viations, since this list is the only domain-sensitive resource in our system. The results
for this conﬁguration are summarized in row E of Table 4. The error rate increase of5–7% on the abbreviation handling introduced about a twofold increase in the SBDerror rate on the Brown corpus (a 0.65% error rate) and about a threefold increase onthe WSJ corpus (1.41%). But these results are still comparable to those of the majorityof currently used sentence splitters.
9. Detecting Limits for the DCA
Since our DCA method relies on the assumption that the words it tries to disam-
biguate occur multiple times in a document, its performance clearly should dependon the length of the document: very short documents possibly do not provide enoughdisambiguation clues, whereas very long documents possibly contain too many cluesthat cancel each other.
As noted in Section 2.1, the average length of the documents in the Brown corpus
is about 2,300 words. Also, the documents in that corpus are distributed very denselyaround their mean. Thus not much can be inferred about the dependency of the perfor-mance of the method on document length apart from the observation that documents2,000–3,000 words long are handled well by our approach. In the WSJ corpus, the aver-age length of the document is about 500 words, and therefore we could investigate theeffect of short documents on the performance. We divided documents into six groupsaccording to their length and plotted the error rate for the SBD and capitalized-worddisambiguation tasks as well as the number of documents in a group, as shown inFigure 2. As can be seen in the ﬁgure, short documents (50 words or less) have thehighest average error rate both for the SBD task (1.63) and for the capitalized-worddisambiguation task (5.25). For documents 50 to 100 words long, the error rate is stilla bit higher than normal, and for longer documents the error rate stabilizes around1.5 for the capitalized-word disambiguation task and 0.3 for the SBD task. The errorrate on documents 2,000 words long and higher is almost identical to that registeredon the Brown corpus on documents of the same length.
Thus here we can conclude that the proposed approach tends not to be very
effective for documents shorter than 50 words (one to three sentences), but it handleswell documents up to 4,000 words long. Since our corpora did not contain documentssigniﬁcantly longer than that, we could not estimate whether or when the performanceof our method signiﬁcantly deteriorates on longer documents. We also evaluated theperformance of the method on different subcorpora of the Brown corpus: the mostdifﬁcult subdomains proved to be scientiﬁc texts, spoken-language transcripts, andjournalistic texts, whereas ﬁction was the easiest genre for the system.
10. Incorporating DCA into a POS Tagger
To test our hypothesis that DCA can be used as a complement to a local-context
approach, we combined our main conﬁguration (evaluated in row D of Table 4) witha POS tagger. Unlike other POS taggers, this POS tagger (Mikheev 2000) was alsotrained to disambiguate sentence boundaries.
10.1 Training a POS Tagger
In our markup convention (Section 2), periods are tokenized as separate tokens re-gardless of whether they stand for fullstops or belong to abbreviations. Consequentlya POS tagger can naturally treat them similarly to any other ambiguous words. Thereis, however, one difference in the implementation of such a tagger. Normally, a POS307Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
x
x
x
xxxx
o
oo
oo
oocccc
c
c
cNumber of Documents
Cap.Word error rate
SBD error rate
50 100 200 500 1000 2000 3000123200600
Doc. LengthError RateNumber of Docs
400
Figure 2
Distribution of the error rate and the number of documents across the document length(measured in word tokens) in the WSJ corpus.
tagger operates on text spans that form a sentence. This requires resolving sentence
boundaries before tagging. We see no good reason, however, why such text spansshould necessarily be sentences, since the majority of tagging paradigms (e.g., HiddenMarkov Model [HMM] [Kupiec 1992], Brill’s [Brill 1995a], and MaxEnt [Ratnaparkhi1996]) do not attempt to parse an entire sentence and operate only in the local win-dow of two to three tokens. The only reason why taggers traditionally operate onthe sentence level is that a sentence naturally represents a text span in which POSinformation does not depend on the previous and following history.
This issue can be also addressed by breaking the text into short text spans at
positions where the previous tagging history does not affect current decisions. Forinstance, a bigram tagger operates within a window of two tokens, and thus a se-quence of word tokens can be terminated at an unambiguous word token, since thisunambiguous word token will be the only history used in tagging of the next token.At the same time since this token is unambiguous, it is not affected by the history.A trigram tagger operates within a window of three tokens, and thus a sequence ofword tokens can be terminated when two unambiguous words follow each other.
Using Penn Treebank with our tokenization convention (Section 2), we trained a
trigram HMM POS tagger. Words were clustered into ambiguity classes (Kupiec 1992)according to the sets of POS tags they can take on. The tagger predictions were basedon the ambiguity class of the current word, abbreviation/capitalization information,308Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
and trigrams of POS tags:
P(t1...tnO1...On)=argmaxi=n/productdisplay
i=1P(Oi|ti)∗P(ti|ti−1ti−2ai−1)
where tiis a disambiguated POS tag of the ith word, aiis the abbreviation ﬂag of
the ith word, and Oiis the observation at the ith position, which in our case is
the ambiguity class the word belongs to, its capitalization, and its abbreviation ﬂag(AmbClass
i,ai,Cap i). Since the abbreviation ﬂag of the previous word strongly inﬂu-
ences period disambiguation, it was included in the standard trigram model.
We decided to train the tagger with the minimum of preannotated resources. First,
we used 20,000 tagged words to “bootstrap” the training process, because purely un-supervised techniques, at least for the HMM class of taggers, yield lower precision.We also used our DCA system to assign capitalized words, abbreviations, and sen-tence breaks, retaining only cases assigned by the strategies with an accuracy not lessthan 99.8%. This was done because purely unsupervised techniques (e.g., Baum-Welch[Baum and Petrie 1966] or Brill’s [Brill 1995b]) enable regularities to be induced forword classes which contain many entries, exploiting the fact that individual words thatbelong to a POS class occur in different ambiguity patterns. Counting all possible POScombinations in these ambiguity patterns over multiple patterns usually produces theright combinations as the most frequent. Periods as many other closed-class wordscannot be successfully covered by such technique.
After bootstrapping we applied the forward-backward (Baum-Welch) algorithm
(Baum and Petrie 1966) and trained our tagger in the unsupervised mode, that is, with-
out using the annotation available in the Brown corpus and the WSJ corpus. Forevaluation purposes we trained (and bootstrapped) our tagger on the Brown corpusand applied it to the WSJ corpus and vice versa. We preferred this method to tenfoldcross-validation because it allowed us to produce only two tagging models instead oftwenty and also enabled us to test the tagger in harsher conditions, that is, when it isapplied to texts that are very distant from the ones on which it was trained.
The overall performance of the tagger was close to 96%, which is a bit lower
than the best quoted results. This can be accounted for by the fact that training andevaluation were performed on two very different text corpora, as explained above.The performance of the tagger on our target categories (periods and proper names)was very close to that of the DCA method, as can be seen in row F of Table 4.
10.2 POS Tagger and the DCA
We felt that the DCA method could be used as a complement to the POS tagger, sincethese techniques employ different types of information: in-document distribution andlocal context. Thus, a hybrid system can deliver at least two advantages. First, 10–15%of the ambiguous capitalized words unassigned by the DCA can be assigned usinga standard POS-tagging method based on the local syntactic context rather than theinaccurate lexical-lookup approach. Second, the local context can correct some of theerrors made by the DCA.
To implement this hybrid approach we incorporated the DCA system into the
POS tagger. We modiﬁed the tagger model by incorporating the DCA predictionsusing linear interpolation:
P(combined )= λ∗P(tagger )+( 1−λ)∗P(DCA
Strategy )
where P(DCA Strategy )is the accuracy of a speciﬁc DCA strategy and P(tagger )is the
probability assigned by the tagger’s model. Although it was possible to estimate an309Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
optimal value for λfrom the tagged corpus, we decided simply to set it to be 0.5 (i.e.,
giving similar weight to both sources of information). Instead of using the SBD ruleset described in Section 3, in this conﬁguration, period assignments were handled bythe tagger’s model.
Row G of Table 4 displays the results of the application of the hybrid system. We
see an improvement on proper-name recognition in comparison to the DCA or POS-tagging approaches (rows D and F) by about a 30–40% cut in the error rate: an overallerror rate of 1.87% on the Brown corpus and of 3.22% on the WSJ corpus. In turn thisenabled better tagging of sentence boundaries: a 0.20% error rate on the Brown corpusand a 0.31% error rate on the WSJ corpus, which corresponds to about a 20% cut inthe error rate in comparison to the DCA or the POS-tagging approaches alone.
Thus, although for applications that rely on POS tagging it probably makes more
sense to have a single system that assigns both POS tags and sentence boundaries,there is still a clear beneﬁt in using the DCA method because
•the DCA method incorporated into the POS tagger signiﬁcantly reduced
the error rate on the target categories (periods and proper names).
•the DCA method is domain independent, whereas taggers usually need
to be trained for each speciﬁc domain to obtain best results.
•the DCA system was used in resource preparation for training the tagger.
•the DCA system is signiﬁcantly faster than the tagger, does not require
resource development, and for tasks that do not require full POSinformation, it is a preferable solution.
So in general, the DCA method can be seen as an enhancer for a POS tagger and
also as a lightweight alternative to such a tagger when full POS information is notrequired.
11. Further Experiments
11.1 The Cache Extension
One of the features of the method advocated in this article is that the system collectssuggestive instances of usage for target words from each document, then applies thisinformation during the second pass through the document (actual processing), andthen “forgets” what it has learned before handling another document. The main rea-son for not carrying over the information that has been inferred from one documentto process another document is that in general we do not know whether this newdocument comes from the same corpus as the ﬁrst document, and thus the regular-ities that have been identiﬁed in the ﬁrst document might not be useful, but ratherharmful, when applied to that new document. When we are dealing with documentsof reasonable length, this “forgetful” behavior does not matter much, because suchdocuments usually contain enough disambiguation clues. As we showed in Section 8,however, when short documents of one to three sentences are being processed, quiteoften there are not enough disambiguation clues within the document itself, whichleads to inferior performance.
To improve the performance on short documents, we introduced a special caching
module that propagates some information identiﬁed in previously processed docu-ments to the processing of a new one. To propagate features of individual words fromone document to processing another one is a risky strategy, since words are very310Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
ambiguous. Word sequences, however, are much more stable and can be propagated
across documents. We decided to accumulate in our cache all multiword proper namesand lower-cased word bigrams induced by the sequence strategy (Section 7.1). Theseword sequences are used by the sequence strategy exactly as are word sequences in-duced on the ﬂy, and then the induced on-the-ﬂy sequences are added to the cache.We also add to the cache the bigrams of abbreviations and regular words induced bythe abbreviation-handling module, as explained in Section 6. These bigrams are usedtogether with the bigrams induced on the ﬂy. This strategy proved to be quite useful:it covered another 2% of unresolved cases (before applying the lexical lookup), withan error rate of less than 1%.
11.2 Handling Russian News
To test how easy it is to apply the DCA to a new language, we tested it on a corpusof British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) news in Russian. We collected this corpusfrom the Internet /angbracketlefthttp://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/russian/world/default.htm /angbracketrightover a period of 30
days. This gave us a corpus of 300 short documents (one or two paragraphs each).We automatically created the supporting resources from 364,000 documents from theRussian corpus of the European Corpus Initiative, using the method described insection 5.
Since, unlike English, Russian is a highly inﬂected language, we had to deal with
the case normalization issue. Before using the DCA method, we applied a Russianmorphological processor (Mikheev and Liubushkina 1995) to convert each word inthe text to its main form: nominative case singular for nouns and adjectives, inﬁnitivefor verbs, etc. For words that could be normalized to several main forms (polysemy),when secondary forms of different words coincided, we retained all the main forms.Since the documents in the BBC news corpus were rather short, we applied the cachemodule, as described in Section 11.1. This allowed us to reuse information across thedocuments.
Russian proved to be a simpler case than English for our tasks. First, on average,
Russian words are longer than English words: thus the identiﬁcation of abbreviationsis simpler. Second, proper names in Russian coincide less frequently with commonwords; this makes the disambiguation of capitalized words in ambiguous positionseasier. The overall performance reached a 0.1% error rate on sentence boundaries anda 1.8% error rate on ambiguous capitalized words, with the coverage on both tasksat 100%.
12. Related Research
12.1 Research in Nonlocal Context
The use of nonlocal context and dynamic adaptation have been studied in languagemodeling for speech recognition. Kuhn and de Mori (1998) proposed a cache modelthat works as a kind of short-term memory by which the probability of the most re-cent nwords is increased over the probability of a general-purpose bigram or trigram
model. Within certain limits, such a model can adapt itself to changes in word frequen-cies, depending on the topic of the text passage. The DCA system is similar in spiritto such dynamic adaptation: it applies word n-grams collected on the ﬂy from the
document under processing and favors them more highly than the default assignmentbased on prebuilt lists. But unlike the cache model, it uses a multipass strategy.
Clarkson and Robinson (1997) developed a way of incorporating standard n-grams
into the cache model, using mixtures of language models and also exponentially de-caying the weight for the cache prediction depending on the recency of the word’s last311Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
occurrence. In our experiments we applied simple linear interpolation to incorporate
the DCA system into a POS tagger. Instead of decaying nonlocal information, we optedfor not propagating it from one document for processing of another. For handling verylong documents with our method, however, the information decay strategy seems tobe the right way to proceed.
Mani and MacMillan (1995) pointed out that little attention had been paid in the
named-entity recognition ﬁeld to the discourse properties of proper names. They pro-posed that proper names be viewed as linguistic expressions whose interpretationoften depends on the discourse context, advocating text-driven processing rather thanreliance on pre-existing lists. The DCA outlined in this article also uses nonlocal dis-course context and does not heavily rely on pre-existing word lists. It has been appliednot only to the identiﬁcation of proper names, as described in this article, but also totheir classiﬁcation (Mikheev, Grover, and Moens 1998).
Gale, Church, and Yarowsky (1992) showed that words strongly tend to exhibit
only one sense in a document or discourse (“one sense per discourse”). Since thenthis idea has been applied to several tasks, including word sense disambiguation(Yarowsky 1995) and named-entity recognition (Cucerzan and Yarowsky 1999). Gale,Church, and Yarowsky’s observation is also used in our DCA, especially for the iden-tiﬁcation of abbreviations. In capitalized-word disambiguation, however, we use thisassumption with caution and ﬁrst apply strategies that rely not just on single wordsbut on words together with their local contexts ( n-grams). This is similar to “one sense
per collocation” idea of Yarowsky (1993).
The description of the EAGLE workbench for linguistic engineering (Baldwin et al.
1997) mentions a case normalization module that uses a heuristic in which a capitalizedword in an ambiguous position should be rewritten without capitalization if it is foundlower-cased in the same document. This heuristic also employs a database of bigramsand unigrams of lower-cased and capitalized words found in unambiguous positions.It is quite similar to our method for capitalized-word disambiguation. The descriptionof the EAGLE case normalization module provided by Baldwin et al. is, however, verybrief and provides no performance evaluation or other details.
12.2 Research in Text Preprocessing
12.2.1 Sentence Boundary Disambiguation. There exist two large classes of SBD sys-
tems: rule based and machine learning. The rule-based systems use manually builtrules that are usually encoded in terms of regular-expression grammars supplementedwith lists of abbreviations, common words, proper names, etc. To put together a fewrules is fast and easy, but to develop a rule-based system with good performance isquite a labor-consuming enterprise. For instance, the Alembic workbench (Aberdeen etal. 1995) contains a sentence-splitting module that employs over 100 regular-expressionrules written in Flex. Another well-acknowledged shortcoming of rule-based systemsis that such systems are usually closely tailored to a particular corpus or sublanguageand are not easily portable across domains.
Automatically trainable software is generally seen as a way of producing sys-
tems that are quickly retrainable for a new corpus, for a new domain, or even foranother language. Thus, the second class of SBD systems employs machine learningtechniques such as decision tree classiﬁers (Riley 1989), neural networks (Palmer andHearst 1994), and maximum-entropy modeling (Reynar and Ratnaparkhi 1997). Ma-chine learning systems treat the SBD task as a classiﬁcation problem, using featuressuch as word spelling, capitalization, sufﬁx, and word class found in the local con-text of a potential sentence-terminating punctuation sign. Although training of such312Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
systems is completely automatic, the majority of machine learning approaches to the
SBD task require labeled examples for training. This implies an investment in the dataannotation phase.
The main difference between the existing machine learning and rule-based meth-
ods for the SBD task and our approach is that we decomposed the SBD task intoseveral subtasks. We decided to tackle the SBD task through the disambiguation ofthe period preceding and following words and then feed this information into a verysimple SBD rule set. In contrast, the standard practice in building SBD software is todisambiguate conﬁgurations of a period with its ambiguous local context in a singlestep, either by encoding disambiguation clues into the rules or inferring a classiﬁerthat accounts for the ambiguity of the words on the left and on the right of the period.
Our approach to SBD is closer in spirit to machine learning methods because its
retargeting does not require rule reengineering and can be done completely automat-ically. Unlike traditional machine learning SBD approaches, however, our approachdoes not require annotated data for training.
12.2.2 Disambiguation of Capitalized Words. Disambiguation of capitalized words
is usually handled by POS taggers, which treat capitalized words in the same wayas other categories, that is, by accounting for the immediate syntactic context andusing estimates collected from a training corpus. As Church (1988) rightly pointedout, however, “Proper nouns and capitalized words are particularly problematic: somecapitalized words are proper nouns and some are not. Estimates from the BrownCorpus can be misleading. For example, the capitalized word ‘Acts’ is found twice inthe Brown Corpus, both times as a proper noun (in a title). It would be misleading toinfer from this evidence that the word ‘Acts’ is always a proper noun.”
In the information extraction ﬁeld, the disambiguation of ambiguous capitalized
words has always been tightly linked to the classiﬁcation of proper names into seman-tic classes such as person name, location, and company name. Named-entity recogni-tion systems usually use sets of complex hand-crafted rules that employ a gazetteerand a local context (Krupa and Hausman 1998). In some systems such dependenciesare learned from labeled examples (Bikel et al. 1997). The advantage of the named-entity approach is that the system not only identiﬁes proper names but also determinestheir semantic class. The disadvantage is in the cost of building a wide-coverage set ofcontextual clues manually or producing annotated training data. Also, the contextualclues are usually highly speciﬁc to the domain and text genre, making such systemsvery difﬁcult to port.
Both POS taggers and named-entity recognizers are normally built using the local-
context paradigm. In contrast, we opted for a method that relies on the entire distri-bution of a word in a document. Although it is possible to train some classes of POStaggers without supervision, this usually leads to suboptimal performance. Thus themajority of taggers are trained using at least some labeled data. Named-entity recog-nition systems are usually hand-crafted or trained from labeled data. As was shownabove, our method does not require supervised training.
12.2.3 Disambiguation of Abbreviations. Not much information has been published
on abbreviation identiﬁcation. One of the better-known approaches is described inGrefenstette and Tapanainen (1994), which suggested that abbreviations ﬁrst be ex-tracted from a corpus using abbreviation-guessing heuristics akin to those describedin Section 6 and then reused in further processing. This is similar to our treatment ofabbreviation handling, but our strategy is applied on the document rather than corpuslevel. The main reason for restricting abbreviation discovery to a single document is313Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
that this does not presuppose the existence of a corpus in which the current document
is similar to other documents.
Park and Byrd (2001) recently described a hybrid method for ﬁnding abbrevia-
tions and their deﬁnitions. This method ﬁrst applies an “abbreviation recognizer” thatgenerates a set of “candidate abbreviations” for a document. Then for this set of can-didates the system tries to ﬁnd in the text their deﬁnitions (e.g., United Kingdom for
UK). The abbreviation recognizer for these purposes is allowed to overgenerate signif-
icantly. There is no harm (apart from the performance issues) in proposing too manycandidate abbreviations, because only those that can be linked to their deﬁnitions willbe retained. Therefore the abbreviation recognizer treats as a candidate any token oftwo to ten characters that contains at least one capital letter. Candidates then are ﬁl-tered through a set of known common words and proper names. At the same timemany good abbreviations and acronyms are ﬁltered out because not for all of themwill deﬁnitions exist in the current document.
In our task we are interested in ﬁnding all and only abbreviations that end with
a period (proper abbreviations rather than acronyms), regardless of whether they canbe linked to their deﬁnitions in the current document or not. Therefore, in our methodwe cannot tolerate candidate overgeneration or excessive ﬁltering and had to developmore selective methods for ﬁnding abbreviations in text.
13. DiscussionIn this article we presented an approach that tackles three important aspects of text nor-
malization: sentence boundary disambiguation, disambiguation of capitalized wordswhen they are used in positions where capitalization is expected, and identiﬁcation ofabbreviations. The major distinctive features of our approach can be summarized asfollows:
•We tackle the sentence boundary task only after we have fully
disambiguated the word on the left and the word on the right of apotential sentence boundary punctuation sign.
•To disambiguate capitalized words and abbreviations, we use
information distributed across the entire document rather than theirimmediate local context.
•Our approach does not require manual rule construction or data
annotation for training. Instead, it relies on four word lists that can begenerated completely automatically from a raw (unlabeled) corpus.
In this approach we do not try to resolve each ambiguous word occurrence individu-
ally. Instead, the system scans the entire document for the contexts in which the wordsin question are used unambiguously, and this gives it grounds, acting by analogy, forresolving ambiguous contexts.
We deliberately shaped our approach so that it largely does not rely on precom-
piled statistics, because the most interesting events are inherently infrequent and henceare difﬁcult to collect reliable statistics for. At the same time precompiled statisticswould be smoothed across multiple documents rather than targeted to a speciﬁc docu-ment. By collecting suggestive instances of usage for target words from each particulardocument on the ﬂy, rather than relying on preacquired resources smoothed across theentire document collection, our approach is robust to domain shifts and new lexicaand closely targeted to each document.314Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
A signiﬁcant advantage of this approach is that it can be targeted to new domains
completely automatically, without human intervention. The four word lists that oursystem uses for its operation can be generated automatically from a raw corpus andrequire no human annotation. Although some SBD systems can be trained on relativelysmall sets of labeled examples, their performance in such cases is somewhat lower thantheir optimal performance. For instance, Palmer and Hearst (1997) report that the SATZsystem (decision tree variant) was trained on a set of about 800 labeled periods, whichcorresponds to a corpus of about 16,000 words. This is a relatively small training setthat can be manually marked in a few hours’ time. But the error rate (1.5%) of thedecision tree classiﬁer trained on this small sample was about 50% higher than thatwhen trained on 6,000 labeled examples (1.0%).
The performance of our system does not depend on the availability of labeled
training examples. For its “training,” it uses a raw (unannotated in any way) corpusof texts. Although it needs such a corpus to be relatively large (a few hundred thousandwords), this is normally not a problem, since when the system is targeted to a newdomain, such a corpus is usually already available at no extra cost. Therefore there is notrade-off between the amount of human labor and the performance of the system. Thisnot only makes retargeting of such system easier but also enables it to be operationalin a completely autonomous way: it needs only to be pointed to texts from a newdomain, and then it can retarget itself automatically.
Although the DCA requires two passes through a document, the simplicity of the
underlying algorithms makes it reasonably fast. It processes about 3,000 words persecond using a Pentium II 400 MHz processor. This includes identiﬁcation of abbre-viations, disambiguation of capitalized words, and then disambiguation of sentenceboundaries. This is comparable to the speed of other preprocessing systems.
3The oper-
ational speed is about 10% higher than the training speed because, apart from applyingthe system to the training corpus, training also involves collecting, thresholding, andsorting of the word lists—all done automatically but at extra time cost. Training onthe 300,000-word NYT text collection took about two minutes.
Despite its simplicity, the performance of our approach was on the level with
the previously highest reported results on the same test collections. The error rateon sentence boundaries in the Brown corpus was not signiﬁcantly worse than thelowest quoted before (Riley 1989: 0.28% vs. 0.20% error rate). On the WSJ corpusour system performed slightly better than the combination of the Alembic and SATZsystems described in Palmer and Hearst (1997) (0.44% vs. 0.5% error rate). Althoughthese error rates seem to be very small, they are quite signiﬁcant. Unlike general POStagging, in which it is unfair to expect an error rate of less than 2% because even humanannotators have a disagreement rate of about 3%, sentence boundaries are much lessambiguous (with a disagreement of about 1 in 5,000). This shows that an error rateof 1 in 200 (0.5%) is still far from reaching the disagreement level. On the other hand,one error in 200 periods means that there is one error in every two documents in theBrown corpus and one error in every four documents in the WSJ corpus.
With all its strong points, there are a number of restrictions to the proposed ap-
proach. First, in its present form it is suitable only for processing of reasonably “well-behaved” texts that consistently use capitalization (mixed case) and do not containmuch noisy data. Thus, for instance, we do not expect our system to perform wellon single-cased texts (e.g., texts written in all capital or all lower-cased letters) or on
3 Palmer and Hearst (1997) report a speed of over 10,000 sentences a minute, which with their average
sentence length of 20 words equals over 3,000 words per second, but on a slower machine (DEC Alpha3000).315Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
optical character reader–generated texts. We noted in Section 8 that very short doc-
uments of one to three sentences also present a difﬁculty for our approach. This iswhere robust syntactic systems like SATZ (Palmer and Hearst 1997) or the POS taggerreported in Mikheev (2000), which do not heavily rely on word capitalization and arenot sensitive to document length, have an advantage.
Our DCA uses information derived from the entire document and thus can be
used as a complement to approaches based on the local context. When we incorpo-rated the DCA system into a POS tagger (Section 8), we measured a 30–35% cut in theerror rate on proper-name identiﬁcation in comparison to DCA or the POS-taggingapproaches alone. This in turn enabled better tagging of sentence boundaries: a 0.20%error rate on the Brown corpus and a 0.31% error rate on the WSJ corpus, which corre-sponds to about a 20% cut in the error rate in comparison to DCA or the POS-taggingapproaches alone.
We also investigated the portability of our approach to other languages and ob-
tained encouraging results on a corpus of news in Russian. This strongly suggests thatthe DCA method can be applied to the majority of European languages, since theyshare the same principles of capitalization and word abbreviation. Obvious exceptions,though, are German and some Scandinavian languages in which capitalization is usedfor things other than proper-name and sentence start signaling. This does not mean,however, that the DCA in general is not suitable for preprocessing of German texts—itjust needs to be applied with different disambiguation clues.
Initially the system described in this article was developed as a text normalization
module for a named-entity recognition system (Mikheev, Grover, and Moens 1998) thatparticipated in MUC-7. There the ability to identify proper names with high accuracyproved to be instrumental in enabling the entire system to achieve a very high level ofperformance. Since then this text normalization module has been used in several othersystems, and its ability to be adapted easily to new domains enabled rapid develop-ment of text analysis capabilities in medical, legal, and law enforcement domains.
Appendix A: SBD Rule Set
In this section we present the rule set used by our system to assign potential sentence
boundary punctuation as
FS Punctuation that signals end of sentence
AP Period that is part of abbreviationAFS Period that is part of abbreviation and signals end of sentence
This rule set operates over tokens that are disambiguated as to whether or not they
are abbreviations and whether or not they are proper names. Tokens are categorizedinto overlapping sets as follows:
NONE No token (end of input)
ANY Any tokenANY-OR-NONE Any token or no token at allABBR Token that was disambiguated as “abbreviation”
(Note: ...Ellipsis is treated as an abbreviation too)
Not
ABBR Nonpunctuation token that was disambiguated as “not
abbreviation”
CLOSE PUNCT Closing quotes, closing brackets
OPEN PUNCT Opening quotes, opening brackets316Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
PUNCT Punctuation token not CLOSE PUNCT or OPEN PUNCT
or [.!?;]
NUM NumberLOW
COMMON Lower-cased common word
CAP COMMON Capitalized word that was disambiguated as a common word
CAP PROP Capitalized word that was disambiguated as a proper name
PROPER NAME Proper name
Rule Set
word-2 word-1 FOCAL word+1 word+2 Assign Example
ANY Not ABBR [.?!] ANY-OR-NONE ANY-OR-NONE FS book.
ANY CLOSE PUNCT [.?!] ANY-OR-NONE ANY-OR-NONE FS ).
ABBR . [.?!] ANY-OR-NONE ANY-OR-NONE FS Tex. !
ANY ANY ; CAP COMMON ANY-OR-NONE FS ; The
ABBR . NONE NONE AFS Tex.EOFABBR . CAP
COMMON ANY-OR-NONE AFS Tex. The
ABBR . CLOSE PUNCT CAP COMMON AFS kg.) This
ABBR . OPEN PUNCT CAP COMMON AFS kg. (This
ABBR . CLOSE PUNCT CAP COMMON AFS kg.) (This
OPEN PUNCT
ABBR . PUNCT ANY-OR-NONE AP kg.,ABBR . [.?!] ANY-OR-NONE AP Tex .!
ABBR . LOW
COMMON ANY-OR-NONE AP kg. this
ABBR . CLOSE PUNCT LOW COMMON AP kg.) this
ABBR . OPEN PUNCT LOW COMMON AP kg. (this
ABBR . CLOSE PUNCT LOW COMMON AP kg.) (this
OPEN PUNCT
ABBR . ABBR . AP Sen. Gen.ABBR . NUM ANY-OR-NONE AP kg. 5ABBR . PROPER
NAME ANY-OR-NONE AP Dr. Smith
Acknowledgments
The work reported in this article was
supported in part by grant GR/L21952 (TextTokenization Tool) from the Engineeringand Physical Sciences Research Council,U.K., and also it beneﬁted from the ongoingefforts in building domain-independenttext-processing software at Infogistics Ltd. Iam also grateful to one anonymousreviewer who put a lot of effort into makingthis article as it is now.
References
Aberdeen, John S., John D. Burger, David S.
Day, Lynette Hirschman, PatriciaRobinson, and Marc Vilain. 1995. “Mitre:Description of the alembic system usedfor MUC-6.” In Proceedings of the Sixth
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-6) ,
Columbia, Maryland, November. MorganKaufmann.
Baldwin, Breck, Christine Doran, Jeffrey
Reynar, Michael Niv, Bangalore Srinivas,and Mark Wasson. 1997. “EAGLE: Anextensible architecture for generallinguistic engineering.” In Proceedings of
Computer-Assisted Information Searching onInternet (RIAO ’97) , Montreal, June.
Baum, Leonard E. and Ted Petrie. 1966.
Statistical inference for probabilisticfunctions of ﬁnite Markov chains. Annals
of Mathematical Statistics 37:1559–1563.
Bikel, Daniel, Scott Miller, Richard
Schwartz, and Ralph Weischedel. 1997.“Nymble: A high performance learningname-ﬁnder.” In Proceedings of the Fifth
Conference on Applied Natural LanguageProcessing (ANLP’97) , pages 194–200.
Washington, D.C., Morgan Kaufmann.
Brill, Eric. 1995a. Transformation-based
error-driven learning and naturallanguage parsing: A case study inpart-of-speech tagging. Computational
Linguistics 21(4):543–565.
Brill, Eric. 1995b. “Unsupervised learning of
disambiguation rules for part of speechtagging.” In David Yarovsky and KennethChurch, editors, Proceedings of the Third
Workshop on Very Large Corpora , pages
1–13, Somerset, New Jersey. Associationfor Computational Linguistics.
Burnage, Gavin. 1990. CELEX: A Guide for
Users . Centre for Lexical Information,
Nijmegen, Netherlands.317Mikheev Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
Chinchor, Nancy. 1998. “Overview of
MUC-7.” In Seventh Message Understanding
Conference (MUC-7): Proceedings of aConference Held in Fairfax , April. Morgan
Kaufmann.
Church, Kenneth. 1988. “A stochastic parts
program and noun-phrase parser forunrestricted text.” In Proceedings of the
Second ACL Conference on Applied NaturalLanguage Processing (ANLP’88) , pages
136–143, Austin, Texas.
Church, Kenneth. 1995. “One term or two?”
InSIGIR’95, Proceedings of the 18th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference onResearch and Development in InformationRetrieval , pages 310–318, Seattle,
Washington, July. ACM Press.
Clarkson, Philip and Anthony J. Robinson.
1997. “Language model adaptation usingmixtures and an exponentially decayingcache.” In Proceedings IEEE International
Conference on Speech and Signal Processing ,
Munich, Germany.
Cucerzan, Silviu and David Yarowsky. 1999.
“Language independent named entityrecognition combining morphological andcontextual evidence.” In Proceedings of
Joint SIGDAT Conference on EMNLP andVLC.
Francis, W. Nelson and Henry Kucera. 1982.
Frequency Analysis of English Usage: Lexiconand Grammar . Houghton Mifﬂin, New
York.
Gale, William, Kenneth Church, and David
Yarowsky. 1992. “One sense perdiscourse.” In Proceedings of the Fourth
DARP A Speech and Natural LanguageWorkshop , pages 233–237.
Grefenstette, Gregory and Pasi Tapanainen.
1994. “What is a word, what is asentence? Problems of tokenization.” InThe Proceedings of Third Conference onComputational Lexicography and TextResearch (COMPLEX’94) , Budapest,
Hungary.
Krupka, George R. and Kevin Hausman.
1998. Isoquest Inc.: Description of thenetowl extractor system as used forMUC-7. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-7) ,
Fairfax, VA. Morgan Kaufmann.
Kuhn, Roland and Renato de Mori. 1998. A
cache-based natural language model forspeech recognition. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence12:570–583.
Kupiec, Julian. 1992. Robust part-of-speech
tagging using a hidden Markov model.Computer Speech and Language .
Mani, Inderjeet and T. Richard MacMillan.
1995. “Identifying unknown propernames in newswire text.” In B. Boguraev
and J. Pustejovsky, editors, Corpus
Processing for Lexical Acquisition . MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, pages 41–59.
Marcus, Mitchell, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz,
and Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building alarge annotated corpus of English: ThePenn treebank. Computational Linguistics
19(2):313–329.
Mikheev, Andrei. 1997. Automatic rule
induction for unknown word guessing.Computational Linguistics 23(3):405–423.
Mikheev, Andrei. 1999. A knowledge-free
method for capitalized worddisambiguation. In Proceedings of the 37th
Conference of the Association forComputational Linguistics (ACL’99) , pages
159–168, University of Maryland, CollegePark.
Mikheev, Andrei. 2000. “Tagging sentence
boundaries.” In Proceedings of the First
Meeting of the North American Chapter of theComputational Linguistics (NAACL’2000) ,
pages 264–271, Seattle, Washington.Morgan Kaufmann.
Mikheev, Andrei, Clair Grover, and Colin
Matheson. 1998. TTT: Text Tokenisation Tool .
Language Technology Group, Universityof Edinburgh. Available athttp://www.ltg.ed.ac.uk/software/ttt/index.html.
Mikheev, Andrei, Clair Grover, and Marc
Moens. 1998. Description of the ltgsystem used for MUC-7. In Seventh
Message Understanding Conference(MUC–7): Proceedings of a Conference Held inFairfax , Virginia. Morgan Kaufmann.
Mikheev, Andrei and Liubov Liubushkina.
1995. Russian morphology: Anengineering approach. Natural Language
Engineering 1(3):235–260.
Palmer, David D. and Marti A. Hearst. 1994.
“Adaptive sentence boundarydisambiguation.” In Proceedings of the
Fourth ACL Conference on Applied NaturalLanguage Processing (ANLP’94) , pages
78–83, Stuttgart, Germany, October.Morgan Kaufmann.
Palmer, David D. and Marti A. Hearst. 1997.
Adaptive multilingual sentence boundarydisambiguation. Computational Linguistics
23(2):241–269.
Park, Youngja and Roy J. Byrd. 2001.
“Hybrid text mining for ﬁndingabbreviations and their deﬁnitions.” InProceedings of the Conference on EmpiricalMethods in Natural Language Processing(EMLP’01) , pages 16–19, Washington,
D.C. Morgan Kaufmann.
Ratnaparkhi, Adwait. 1996. “A maximum
entropy model for part-of-speech318Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 3
tagging.” In Proceedings of Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural LanguageProcessing , pages 133–142, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Reynar, Jeffrey C. and Adwait Ratnaparkhi.
1997. “A maximum entropy approach toidentifying sentence boundaries.” InProceedings of the Fifth ACL Conference onApplied Natural Language Processing(ANLP’97) , pages 16–19. Morgan
Kaufmann.
Riley, Michael D. 1989. “Some applications
of tree-based modeling to speech andlanguage indexing.” In Proceedings of the
DARP A Speech and Natural LanguageWorkshop , pages 339–352. Morgan
Kaufmann.
Yarowsky, David. 1993. “One sense per
collocation.” In Proceedings of ARP A
Human Language Technology Workshop ’93 ,
pages 266–271, Princeton, New Jersey.
Yarowsky, David. 1995. “Unsupervised
word sense disambiguation rivalingsupervised methods.” In Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics(ACL’95) , pages 189–196.